---
# Course title, summary, and position.
linktitle: Rossby wave ray tracing
summary: Inverstigating the Rossby wave ray in a horizontally non-uniform flow.
weight: 1

# Page metadata.
title: Rossby wave theory
date: "2019-04-09T00:00:00Z"
lastmod: "2019-09-09T00:00:00Z"
draft: false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc: true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type: docs  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
# - name: Declare this menu item as a parent with ID `name`.
# - weight: Position of link in menu.
menu:
  waveray:
    name: Theory
    weight: 1
---



Wave ray tracing is firstly introduced into atmospheric sciences by Hoskins and Karoly (1981) to explore the pathway of atmospheric response to steady thermal and orographic forcing in a zonally symmetric zonal flow. Afterwards, the wave ray tracing theory was extended to a horizontally non-uniform flow (e.g., Karoly 1983; Schneider and Watterson 1984; Li and Nathan 1997; Li et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2015). However, none of these works discussed the phase evolutions along the ray and thus may not provide any more information other than the path. For the present section, we derive an extended framework for Rossby wave and phase tracing and test its sensitivity to idealized and realistic flows.
The Rossby wave ray tracing equations are generated by a local frequency dispersion function that follows from a linearized non-divergent barotropic vorticity equation on a Mercator projection of the sphere (Karoly 1983; Li et al. 2015). Following Li et al.(2015), the dispersion relation can be written as
ω=kuM+lvM+l∂q∂x-k∂q∂yK2,#1
where
\left({\bar{u}}_M,{\bar{v}}_M\right)=\frac{\left(\bar{u},\bar{v}\right)}{\cos{\varphi}}
is the Mercator projection of the time-mean zonal and meridional winds,
\bar{q}=2\mathrm{\Omega}\sin{\varphi}+\nabla^2\bar{\psi}
is the time-mean absolute vorticity, \mathrm{\Omega} is the rotation rate of the earth, \bar{\psi} is the time-mean streamfunction, \varphi is latitude, k and l are zonal and meridional wavenumbers, respectively, and K=\sqrt{k^2+l^2} is total wavenumber. Using Eq. (1) and kinematic wave theory (Whitham 1960; Bühler 2009) gives the following ray tracing equations


